Add initial atomic_accessor proposal draft (#300)
ORNL/cpp-proposals-pub: atomic_accessor/atomic_accessor.md

---
title: "`atomic_accessor`"

> document: P2553R1

Reviewer: Did you mean to have a P number here?

> date: today

Reviewer: Should we set a date explicitly?

audience: LEWG
author:
  - name: Christian Trott 
    email: <crtrott@sandia.gov>
  - name: Damien Lebrun-Grandie 
    email: <lebrungrandt@ornl.gov>
  - name: Mark Hoemmen 
    email: <mhoemmen@stellarscience.com>
  - name: Daniel Sunderland
    email: <dansunderland@gmail.com>
toc: true
---

# Revision History

## Initial Version 2022-10 Mailing

# Rational

This proposal adds an `atomic_accessor` to the C++ standard, to be used with `mdspan`.

> When accessing data through an `mdspan` with an `atomic_accessor` all operations are performed atomicly, by using `atomic_ref` as the `reference_type`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When accessing data through an `mdspan` with an `atomic_accessor` all operations are performed atomically, by using `atomic_ref` as the `reference_type`.
```

> `atomic_accessor` was one of the rationals provided in P0009 for `mdspan`s *accessor policy* template parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`atomic_accessor` was part of the rational provided in P0009 for `mdspan`s *accessor policy* template parameter.
```

> One of the primary usecases of adding this accessor is the ability to write algorithms with somewhat generic `mdspan` outputs,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the primary use case for this accessor is the ability to write algorithms with somewhat generic `mdspan` outputs,
```

which can be called in sequential and parallel contexts.
When called in parallel contexts users would simply pass an `mdspan` with an `atomic_accessor` - the algorithm implementation itself
could be agnostic to the calling context.

A variation on this use case is an implementation of an algorithm taking an execution policy,
which adds the `atomic_accessor` to its output argument if called with a parallel policy,
while using the `default_accessor` when called with a sequential policy.
The following demonstrates this with a function computing a histogram:

```c++
template<class T, class Extents, class LayoutPolicy>
auto add_atomic_accessor_if_needed(
    std::execution::sequenced_policy,
    mdspan<T, Extents, LayoutPolicy> m) {
        return m;
    }

> template<class ExecT, class T, class Extents, class LayoutPolicy>
> auto add_atomic_accessor_if_needed(
>     ExecT,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
template<class ExecutionPolicy, class T, class Extents, class LayoutPolicy>
auto add_atomic_accessor_if_needed(
    ExecutionPolicy,
```

Reviewer: You kinda need to handle the unseq non-parallel policy as well

    mdspan<T, Extents, LayoutPolicy> m) {
        return mdspan(m.data_handle(), m.mapping(), atomic_accessor<T>());
    }

template<class ExecT>
void compute_histogram(ExecT exec, float bin_size,
               mdspan<int, stdex::dextents<int,1>> output,
               mdspan<float, stdex::dextents<int,1>> data) {

  static_assert(is_execution_policy_v<ExecT>);

  auto accumulator = add_atomic_accessor_if_needed(exec, output);

  for_each(exec, data.data_handle(), data.data_handle()+data.extent(0), [=](float val) {
    int bin = std::abs(val)/bin_size;
    if(bin > output.extent(0)) bin = output.extent(0)-1;
    accumulator[bin]++;
  });
}
```

# `atomic_accessor` implementation

> The implementaiton of an `atomic_accessor` is straight forward when leveraging `atomic_ref`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementaiton of an `atomic_accessor` is straightforward when leveraging `atomic_ref`:
```
